[Unknown]: I.V.M
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M LSS
[Unknown]: I.V.M LSS
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene in the Unseen. Today's show is about the state of Indian politics
[Amit Varma]: and my guest today is Jayaprakash Narayan, also known as JP. Don't confuse him for the
[Amit Varma]: political giant of the early decades of our independence, who also carried the same name,
[Amit Varma]: though this JP is no less of a political titan. JP started as a physician, then became an
[Amit Varma]: IAS officer and then left the IAS to enter politics. He founded the Lok Satta movement
[Amit Varma]: in 1996, which became the Lok Satta Party in 2006. JP is today not just one of the most
[Amit Varma]: respected politicians in our country, but also one of our most respected public intellectuals.
[Amit Varma]: So without much further ado, let's get on with the show. Welcome to the Scene in the
[Amit Varma]: Unseen, JP. Thank you Amit, my pleasure. JP, I want to talk today about Indian politics
[Amit Varma]: in general. But before I do that, I want to start by talking about your personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: You were a physician to begin with, and then you joined the IAS, and then you got into
[Amit Varma]: politics and started the Lok Satta movement. What prompted you to join politics yourself?
[Guest]: You know, I was born about a decade after independence. So all these starry-eyed notions
[Guest]: of freedom, romanticism about democracy and nation building, you know, that sort of thing
[Guest]: and inheritance from the earlier generation, that rubbed off on all of us, you, I, all
[Guest]: of us from across the country. And by the time I was 17, 18 years of age, the disjunction
[Guest]: between what we all read in textbooks and what we all believe our country to be and
[Guest]: what actually seems to be happening was increasingly apparent even for tender young minds. And
[Guest]: even if you recall 1970s, we had this Watergate episode in the U.S., how a mighty president
[Guest]: was brought to book by the institutions in the country for relatively minor infractions.
[Guest]: And how in our country, India moved towards emergency and then freedom was suspended.
[Guest]: Then post-emergency, Janata came. And there's no institutional accountability and things
[Guest]: didn't change even when there was electoral change. So all this made an enormous impression
[Guest]: on many of us across the country. I'm sure hundreds of thousands of us across the country
[Guest]: in various fields today, in business, in administration, in politics, in media, in social reform and
[Guest]: governance reform, all of us in some way or other are conditioned by this whole experience
[Guest]: of emergency. And that was actually my whole journey. And I went into IAS. I was a medical
[Guest]: doctor going into IAS not because I'm in such of a job, but you wanted to learn and do something
[Guest]: about it. Then when I left IAS, it's because you understood what is possible. You also
[Guest]: understood what are the systemic constraints and then trying to figure out what you can
[Guest]: do as citizens collectively to make change possible. Then the reform movement, Lok Satta.
[Guest]: Then the political party in the hope that if there's sufficient public support in electoral
[Guest]: sense, it'll accelerate change. So it's really the same journey. How do you make a democracy
[Amit Varma]: work?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, nowadays, if you ask young people, they often think of politics as something
[Amit Varma]: that they can never be part of, because they look at the people in politics and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: no matter how educated they might be, or the kind of opinions they might have, they don't
[Amit Varma]: have that same call to public service, let's say our leaders did during the independence
[Amit Varma]: struggle, because they were animated by sort of a higher cause. Well, what young people
[Amit Varma]: today see is that, you know, the people who go into politics, it's essentially they are
[Amit Varma]: driven by a lust for power, they're not animated by those higher principles, like, you say
[Amit Varma]: you were after your experience of emergency and so on. So, you know, having said that,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you're one of the very few people I can think of from sort of the educated classes
[Amit Varma]: who actually made the jump and said, No, I'm going to do something myself. And would you
[Amit Varma]: say that that idealism is borne out? Or was it perhaps a little misplaced?
[Guest]: A, idealism is always borne out if you combine it with practical wisdom and if you have perseverance,
[Guest]: not romanticism. And B, I don't know if really the youngsters today are really different
[Guest]: from the youngsters in that generation. I believe the youth today are as idealistic
[Guest]: as earlier generations, except that the romanticism that we all have because of the freedom struggle
[Guest]: and early days, etc., that probably gave it a more deeper understanding of the society
[Guest]: and a greater clarity about the goals, which is probably good, not bad. So, I don't think
[Guest]: that idealism is any less today. If anything, the skills are greater, they're more technically
[Guest]: equipped, they have greater understanding, more learned today. But the downside is, today
[Guest]: with technology offering many opportunities, the kind of window of opportunity to be able
[Guest]: to make an impact on the country or to attract these people to make an impact on the country
[Guest]: is much less today because now life offers for very bright people many more opportunities
[Guest]: today and there are many more distractions and there are many more technological tools
[Guest]: available. Barring that, I don't think idealism-wise there's any deficiency today and I don't
[Guest]: think there's any incapacity of the young people. It is our inability in the political
[Guest]: process or even in our larger social process, in absorbing these young people and giving
[Guest]: them an opportunity, a purge and giving them a direction. So, the failure, if any, is that
[Guest]: of the earlier generation, not the younger generation today.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to talk a little bit about the nature of politics. Like a lot of us think of, like
[Amit Varma]: for example, one question that has always preoccupied me is, to what extent is the nature
[Amit Varma]: of our politics determined by the structure of our state? For example, many of us think
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian state now as this bloated, parasitic, rent-seeking beast with political parties
[Amit Varma]: really competing only for who will be the ruling mafia for five years and basically
[Amit Varma]: bribing voters either with direct cash or biryani or loan waivers or similar kinds of
[Amit Varma]: patronage politics to come to power. So, would you say there is some truth in that about
[Amit Varma]: the structure of our state determining the nature of our politics and therefore setting
[Amit Varma]: limits of what is politically possible?
[Guest]: There is some truth amidst a whole lot of truth. The structure of the society and the
[Guest]: way our institutions evolved has a profound impact on the nature of politics, electoral
[Guest]: politics, competitive politics. I have no doubt whatsoever. Today, we all know, there
[Guest]: is nothing new and I say original in this. The amount of money power deployed to buy
[Guest]: the vote and the freebies that are offered without actually the state performing its
[Guest]: basic functions and of course fomenting divisions in a very complex and diverse society for
[Guest]: electoral gain, caste, region, religion, language, all kinds of things. They're all too real
[Guest]: for us to require any further elaboration. All this is because of the factors that you
[Guest]: mentioned, but the Indian state has spectacularly failed in doing what it ought to be doing.
[Guest]: In my book, the state has four basic functions. The first is a rule of law and justice and
[Guest]: public order. The second is basic infrastructure, including electricity for every family and
[Guest]: accessible, I'm not saying free, accessible, and transport and water and sanitation and
[Guest]: sewerage and storm water, etc. Then quality education accessible to everybody without
[Guest]: out-of-pocket expenditure and healthcare accessible to everybody without out-of-pocket
[Guest]: expenditure. Indian state failed spectacularly in all these areas. I'm just now doing a survey.
[Guest]: I've taken 49 countries in the world which have more than $200 billion nominal GDP in
[Guest]: the world today in dollar terms. There are only 49 countries at this point of time from
[Guest]: my study. India ranks in almost all things that matter from 45th to 49th. There is not
[Guest]: a single issue where India ranks above 45th because what the state should be doing is
[Guest]: completely neglected in India, and the state has become a rent-seeker, a power-hungry monster,
[Guest]: and the lust for power, even if it's not money always, it's the lust for power and domination.
[Guest]: There are areas where there's not much money. Many panchayats, there's hardly any money,
[Guest]: and yet in many states, the panchayat elections are fought so viciously and so much money
[Guest]: is spent to buy the votes, when the candidate cannot even afford to spend money because
[Guest]: he is thinking most of it is he. This powerlust is mostly a male phenomenon, though females
[Guest]: are not exempt from that. He is thinking that somehow that position gives him some result,
[Guest]: and for that he's willing to do anything at personal cost. So it's an insane process,
[Guest]: largely because of the way we structured the state, excessive centralization, incapacity
[Guest]: to hold bureaucracy to account in a country where most of the people are much weaker and
[Guest]: much less powerful than even the lowliest of government servants. Once we created a
[Guest]: monstrous structure, the rest of it became a vicious cycle from which ordinary politicians
[Guest]: or parties cannot come out, unless you really want to change the institutions of state and
[Guest]: the political process. If you merely want to be a power player to seek power, and this
[Guest]: is a worthy thing, there's nothing wrong in seeking power, but if that becomes your goal,
[Guest]: then you're trapped in a vicious cycle. So you're absolutely right. We have a terrible
[Guest]: situation. And unless we look at institutions and redesigning our democracy in a sensible
[Guest]: way, not a radical way really, in a sensible way, the way it should be in any civilized
[Guest]: country, unless that is done, I don't think there's an easy escape. It doesn't matter
[Guest]: whether Modi is the Prime Minister or Manmohan Singh, or this party or that party, all this
[Guest]: is a make-believe fight. Ultimately, at the grassroots level, it's all the same.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one might then, you know, ideally in politics, one would assume that the politicians
[Amit Varma]: should look at coming to power as a means to an end. But here is essentially an end
[Amit Varma]: in itself. I want to follow on from this and ask a question about the political marketplace
[Amit Varma]: and ask a sort of a fundamental question, which of course, has many complex answers.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm hoping you can shed some light on that, which is that, you know, in any marketplace,
[Amit Varma]: you would imagine that there is demand and there is supply. And therefore, in the political
[Amit Varma]: marketplace, the politicians have to give what the voters want. And given how our state
[Amit Varma]: has failed in so many areas, you would imagine that there would be popular anger about that.
[Amit Varma]: And things would change. However, voters tend to continue voting on the basis of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: identity politics or short term populism, and so on and so forth. And I know this is
[Amit Varma]: a question which, obviously, you gave a lot of thought to before you took the choice to
[Amit Varma]: jump into politics yourself. So my very simple question is, what do voters want?
[Guest]: It's a good question. It's a great question, actually. Perhaps the central question of
[Guest]: our polity today, if you want to reform the country. You know, let us go back a little
[Guest]: bit, Amit, go to 1947, 1950, 1952, the first general election, the constitution making,
[Guest]: so on and so forth. When you go back, what happened? Did the people of India, the voters
[Guest]: of this country today, did they ask for democracy and vote? I don't recall any such thing. It
[Guest]: was given to the people of the country without even asking. And we reduced that even in our
[Guest]: constitution making, vote and shout. You have the right to vote. Somehow they realized that
[Guest]: the new maharajas are chosen by something called a vote, a ballot paper, a ballot box
[Guest]: and the electrical mark. And now, of course, the EVM and pressing the button. They don't
[Guest]: know why or how, but they know that happens. That's true. That's real, because elected
[Guest]: governments are really in power. And two, they have the right to protest every day and
[Guest]: do rasta roko, dharna, some hartal, all kinds of things, bant, this is the Indian staple
[Guest]: in this country. Barring that, we never allowed our people to understand what it really means
[Guest]: to be in a democracy. In a centralized system, when you don't deliver anything, when everything
[Guest]: is reduced to who is in power and people somehow miraculously have the right to decide who
[Guest]: will be in power, then whatever is happening today is an inevitable consequence. And therefore
[Guest]: the voters are seeking either the short-term freebies, because they believe that the subsidies
[Guest]: you get, the free rides you get, the loan waiver you get is something real and tangible.
[Guest]: You can feel it, you can sense it. And they have lost hope that the most substantive long-term
[Guest]: things can ever happen. And that's why in India, there's hardly any debate or hardly
[Guest]: any protest, when the poorest of the poor, the rickshaw pullers send their children to
[Guest]: a private school at 500-600 rupees a month and yet get third-rate education in private
[Guest]: school equally. And people don't even ask about that. It's not even an electoral issue
[Guest]: because people gave up on the government. And there's no other country where there's
[Guest]: greater poverty and mass misery on account of failure of healthcare. Roughly 60 million
[Guest]: people are falling below poverty annually, descending into poverty on account of healthcare
[Guest]: costs or loss of earning on account of ill-health. This is incredible misery. And yet, healthcare
[Guest]: is not really a central issue in our elections, because people gave up on the government.
[Guest]: We did not even make people understand that this is really what governance is about. And
[Guest]: therefore people want to maximize the short-term real gain that they can perceive, because
[Guest]: they don't understand any of the long-term gain. Therefore, blaming the people is no
[Guest]: use. And if freebies are not enough, then obviously, the money for the voting. And we
[Guest]: have done it, we have perfected this in our country, to an art. In most states, there
[Guest]: are some states where it's relatively less prevalent, but money, recent RK Nagar, earlier
[Guest]: Ranjha in Andhra Pradesh, or elsewhere, you see the garishness and the incredible sums
[Guest]: of money we're talking about in a desperately poor country. And of course divisions in a
[Guest]: very, very poor country with enormous schisms. Polarization is so easy, because we are still
[Guest]: tribal. We still haven't built that sense of unity of purpose beyond your origins in
[Guest]: this country. Again, that institution's failure is very clear, evident in those cases. And
[Guest]: therefore, people fall back upon a sense of security that comes from caste, religion,
[Guest]: and anything that touches them, reservation, religious issue, past real and imaginary insults,
[Guest]: or caste, or region, or language, is so easy to arouse them. And none of this is surprising.
[Guest]: It's almost mathematical to me. I'm actually trying to do some kind of a game theory application.
[Guest]: With the initial conditions that we had, what would happen to a democracy? My bet is, in
[Guest]: any country, if these are the initial conditions which are not addressed adequately, if we
[Guest]: didn't build institutions to make people understand the meaning of the vote, then whatever happened
[Guest]: in India is an inevitable consequence in any democracy. We are not unique in that sense.
[Guest]: So the challenge is, how do you now create an incentive for the players to alter these
[Guest]: basic systemic issues? You can't do it overnight, dramatically, by one fell swoop. But what
[Guest]: are the critical levels of change? My belief is local government empowerment with some
[Guest]: accountability and some effective rule of law, so that there is no untrammeled exercise
[Guest]: of abuse of power with impunity. But there is some consequence of following abuse of
[Guest]: power. If these two things are in place, and with service delivery, so that you don't depend
[Guest]: on a party machinery at the grassroots level, and that is really at the root of much of
[Guest]: what happened to parties, then there is a hope. And these three are achievable, and
[Guest]: they're also politically popular. If the media, and the middle classes, and the intelligentsia,
[Guest]: and the opinion makers, they look at these instead of lamenting, or merely taking partisan
[Guest]: positions for or against this other party. I'm an optimist, if I believe it's doable.
[Guest]: I'm also a realist, I know how tough it is, but you have to keep at it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the two great challenges you pointed out is that the voters tend to be
[Amit Varma]: a fatalistic about getting anything out of the government at all and be tribalistic.
[Amit Varma]: So those impulses can be played to but like you said, there are sort of ways of beginning
[Amit Varma]: to make a change. And can you give some examples, maybe from the kind of work you've done about
[Amit Varma]: how the process really is of, you know, getting these kind of, sort of, like, and again, this
[Amit Varma]: is sort of a two part question. One part is that, like, do you address it sort of at a
[Amit Varma]: local level and say, okay, these are the specific changes we want to do this is 123. These are
[Amit Varma]: the things we want to agitate for and we build a movement and we get these done. And or is
[Amit Varma]: it also possible to build a broader movement to have deeper institutional reform of the
[Amit Varma]: kind you pointed out and of the kind you wished existed right from the start from when we
[Amit Varma]: became independent?
[Guest]: Let me give some examples. Let's take Dr. Kurian's, Varghese Kurian's work. What has
[Guest]: he done? Well, Sivan Nath Patel and others, they all started this whole movement. Kurian's
[Guest]: genius and his ability to articulate and build systems and make them acceptable that made
[Guest]: a milk revolution in India possible. What did he do? The illiterate village milk producer,
[Guest]: small milk producer, with no economic muscle, completely disconnected from the market. He
[Guest]: created a framework in which he understands or she understands the stakes in production,
[Guest]: understands that there is transparency in the system and if I produce more and better
[Guest]: quality, I get more income. It's done in a manner that they can easily feel that. Therefore,
[Guest]: they transcended all the limitations of an individual in terms of economy of scale or
[Guest]: money power or their knowledge or access to markets or technology. All this could be made
[Guest]: available because he designed a mechanism where they were in control of their own destiny.
[Guest]: As a public servant, one of the things I have done when I was dealing with industrial infrastructure
[Guest]: work, I handed over the management of industrial states to the entrepreneurs. Until that time,
[Guest]: the entrepreneurs were complaining to me against the officials. Officials were complaining
[Guest]: against the entrepreneurs for obvious reasons. I summoned all of them one day and I said,
[Guest]: both of you are right. Let's hand over to the entrepreneurs who have the stakes. Let
[Guest]: the stakeholders have the responsibility. They can't complain. They simply have to
[Guest]: do and therefore empower them but in an accountable manner. Miraculous results happened. As a
[Guest]: district magistrate in one of the poorest districts of the then combined non-supra-desh
[Guest]: Prakashan district, I gave the people the complete opportunity to utilize resources
[Guest]: with the government programs and empowered them locally in a manner that they could actually
[Guest]: design their project for irrigation. The result was 150,000 to 200,000 acres of small irrigation
[Guest]: at a ridiculously low cost in a very short span of time and every single loan was repaid
[Guest]: within the next one or two years. There's not a single defaulter and every farmer prospered.
[Guest]: So if you really design institutions in a manner that people understand the link between
[Guest]: their decisions and their self-interest. Decision may be vote, it may be economic decision,
[Guest]: it may be some other decision and self-interest very clearly. And if you empower them with
[Guest]: accountability, then people will learn the art of democracy. It's like an apartment
[Guest]: owner's association. I believe there is an economic and political
[Guest]: stake in that. For instance, urban India increasingly is conscious that they're paying taxes. Earlier
[Guest]: they were not conscious of paying taxes. We know now they're paying property taxes and
[Guest]: we feel that we are being shortchanged. And there is an enormous anger. Now they're all
[Guest]: saying, I'll throw down this government and elect a new chief minister, a new prime minister.
[Guest]: But if actually some smart politician understands the value of this and says, look, I will transfer
[Guest]: a part of the resources to you. From Delhi to the States today, the government of India
[Guest]: is transferring by a variety of means, 51 rupees out of 100 in the budget and 67 out
[Guest]: of 100 among all the tax revenues, tax and non-tax revenues, minus debt.
[Guest]: Supposing the state government says, I will transfer to this town and this city and per
[Guest]: capita basis, X amount as your money to be decided in whatever manner you feel deem fit
[Guest]: to utilize is your share of the third tier of federalism. But with accountability, I
[Guest]: will build a first rate ombudsman system. I guarantee you there'll be remarkably improvement
[Guest]: in outcomes. Great leadership will emerge and people understand the value of the vote
[Guest]: and also the limitation of resources and priorities. By not doing it, perpetually shortchanging
[Guest]: ourselves, we are blaming the people on the one hand and we are condemning ourselves to
[Guest]: penury and a very substandard economic base. So I believe there is an economic incentive,
[Guest]: except that the articulation to make people understand why it's their self-interest,
[Guest]: the kind of things that Narendra Modi does, how he's so effective in articulating, but
[Guest]: he's not doing for the right causes. But that kind of ability to make the people connect
[Guest]: their vote with their own self-interest, I think that is missing. I'm a great optimist.
[Guest]: I believe that time is near. It may not happen across the country at one time, one go, but
[Guest]: I believe it will happen in parts of the country. And if we accelerate the process, the country
[Guest]: will be better off. Otherwise, we'll pay the price.
[Amit Varma]: So from what you just said, I actually have three questions, which are almost like separate
[Amit Varma]: questions. So let me just articulate them before I kind of lose track. The example you
[Amit Varma]: gave of Mr. Kurian is a great example, but to me, it's also an illustration of what I
[Amit Varma]: keep saying of how Indian society survives and thrives in spite of the state. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that the whole Amul movement was more of a social movement than anything
[Amit Varma]: to do with politics, really. That's my first observation. Regarding what you did as a district
[Amit Varma]: magistrate. Now, the thing here is, and I'm sure you'll agree with me, is that in that
[Amit Varma]: one case, there happened to be an enlightened district magistrate who decided to get the
[Amit Varma]: job done. But in most cases, the way the incentives are aligned, officers of the state are more
[Amit Varma]: inclined to increase their own power and look after their own turf, rather than actually
[Amit Varma]: take such an enlightened stand where you give the stakeholders so much power, you're actually
[Amit Varma]: giving away power. And how possible is, how easy is that kind of change? Because when
[Amit Varma]: you talk about the big oppressive government, a lot of the reform you try to do is essentially
[Amit Varma]: to make the government devolve power or give away more power, because that's really what
[Amit Varma]: empowering the people also involves. And my third question, again, you talk about how
[Amit Varma]: Modi is great at articulating his ideas, even if they might be the wrong ideas. But my question
[Amit Varma]: is, here is, and this is again a challenge that classical liberals or libertarians often
[Amit Varma]: face, is that many of our ideas are so deeply unintuitive, like when you talk about the
[Amit Varma]: economy not being a zero sum game, but a positive sum game, or you talk about societies and
[Amit Varma]: markets organizing themselves through spontaneous order, and the whole command and control mindset
[Amit Varma]: being wrong. These are very unintuitive ideas. So how, how easy or hard have you found the
[Amit Varma]: communication of such ideas to be over the years?
[Guest]: Okay, let me take each of the three things quickly and then address the last point. Take
[Guest]: Amol. I agree, ultimately the inspiration and the great leadership of one human being
[Guest]: matters, because all great change always has the origin in some individual's inspired idea.
[Guest]: But it's an institutional issue, and there's a distinction between an individual's inspiration
[Guest]: and institutional thing. Institutional thing is self-replicating. It doesn't require the
[Guest]: individual any longer. What Korean did was build a self-governing local milk society
[Guest]: with a federation at the higher level to bring the economies of scale and technology. The
[Guest]: rest of it is all movement. You know, we inspire people always with the great films, great
[Guest]: writers, great thinkers, great speakers. That always happens, but you build an institutional
[Guest]: mechanism for the people to appreciate their self-interest and an incentive to alter their
[Guest]: behavior in never so slight a manner, which will therefore alter the outcomes. And that
[Guest]: is what we need across the country in all spheres of governance.
[Guest]: The second broad issue is, I agree, big change happens either because of enlightenment. You
[Guest]: require, maybe a Lee Kuan Yew, maybe a great thinker who also happens to be a philosopher
[Guest]: king, etc., or incentives aligned, as I said, rightly, to bring about the right kind of
[Guest]: change which are compatible with political power. My argument is that enlightenment and
[Guest]: incentives can go together. Just as economic reform, nobody until 1991 believed, seriously,
[Guest]: that economic liberalization was a political winner. But when the society was primed by
[Guest]: a variety of means, we did not even realize our politicians were so dumb, so short-sighted,
[Guest]: that until a crisis drove them to it, they did not even dare to do it. That's the tragedy
[Guest]: of India. But when the crisis came, when they did it, the most remarkable thing to me, the
[Guest]: take-home point is, that unlike almost any other complex society, there was not even
[Guest]: a murmur of protest against economic liberalization. The whole society, from top to bottom, embraced
[Guest]: it with glee, with almost no disruption. That is, society was ready. Politics was not ready.
[Guest]: I am betting that even today, our society is more ready than politicians give credit
[Guest]: for. It is their failing, it is their incapacity, their mediocrity, and of course their utter
[Guest]: corruption. That is what is leading this. It's not because society is not ready.
[Guest]: The third point about Modi and the dialogue. The broader point is that the right kind of
[Guest]: dialogue, people will listen. And people will do what is right, because you are not giving
[Guest]: them some bhashans about democracy. To me, that is meaningless. You are telling them
[Guest]: what is in their best interest in terms of their kids getting educated. Today, India
[Guest]: has the worst record in education among civilized countries. We are 73rd out of the 74 countries
[Guest]: in PISA rankings, and India's response is that we will no longer participate in PISA
[Guest]: surveys. We'll pretend that everything is alright.
[Guest]: Now every parent knows this. The poorest parents are sending their children to private schools.
[Guest]: In the last 8-9 years after the Right to Education Act, there is an increase in private enrollment
[Guest]: of 40-45% in the country. There is an absolute reduction in government enrollment of 15-20%
[Guest]: in the country. But if only there is a politician who understands this and who has enough megaphone
[Guest]: and tells them, I will ensure quality without burden on your pocket, it will be a political
[Guest]: winner. It is just that the imagination of the politicians is so lacking. Entry barriers
[Guest]: are so great in the first-past-the-post system, and the organizational power required to run
[Guest]: politics is unlike in any other country, thanks to the enormous burden on politicians and
[Guest]: political parties, to get even the minimal service rendered in a government office, in
[Guest]: a milieu of total lack of accountability. You know, you go to any government office
[Guest]: to get anything done, without a bribe or safaris, almost nothing gets done. India is unique
[Guest]: in that sense among aspiring countries. And therefore, political parties are overburdened.
[Guest]: And they think that's the only thing they do, intermediation, and then somehow win the
[Guest]: elections. They forgot the purpose of politics. But I believe this can be changed, and some
[Guest]: efforts are being made. Aam Aadmi Party, with all imperfections, is an effort. But it's
[Guest]: not perhaps smart enough, not wise enough to understand the deeper implications. But
[Guest]: I think it's an important effort. I believe some other efforts are possible. But given
[Guest]: our electoral system, it's going to be much more difficult because the entry barrier is
[Guest]: very high. But we have to fight for that. And I believe...
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on what you mean by the entry barriers being high, the level of organizational
[Amit Varma]: support needed to fight an election?
[Guest]: Let me take the first entry barrier, the second one I'll take later. We have a first-past-the-post
[Guest]: system, as you know. In our system, you take, for instance, a party like BJP, which is winning
[Guest]: almost everything everywhere, and see what happened in Archanagar. They got fewer votes
[Guest]: than Nota. Look at Congress, earlier dominated everywhere, and once they lost the votes in
[Guest]: key states like UP, Bihar, now even to find the third place is very difficult for them,
[Guest]: fourth or even below fourth. So, this is a system which only rewards a party that has
[Guest]: 30-40% votes. Once people feel you are not one of the top two parties, you have no place.
[Guest]: And once people feel that their vote is not translated into electoral feeds, it's a very
[Guest]: irrational thing, but it's a normal response all over the world, not only in India. They
[Guest]: feel the vote is wasted if they vote for the right cause. Even if by electing a third-rate
[Guest]: MLA or MP, you're not doing a service to yourself, that doesn't matter. They feel in that particular
[Guest]: event their vote had a value because they got somebody elected. If you don't get somebody
[Guest]: elected because he's not electable, because you don't have 30-40% votes, then vote is
[Guest]: wasted. Therefore, even the support that would normally be forthcoming would not come.
[Guest]: Let me give two illustrations to support my point. Take Aamadhi Party. Do you recall in
[Guest]: the first election they participated, while they got significant votes, they were still
[Guest]: number two, BJP was number one. People surprised themselves by voting for Aamadhi Party more
[Guest]: than they realized they were going to vote for. Therefore, the moment there was another
[Guest]: election, Aamadhi Party was struck to power. Take Bihar, when Lalluyada was holding sway
[Guest]: and Nitish Kumar was very gainly trying to find an alternative. Election after election
[Guest]: he was decimated. But ultimately in 2004-2005, if you recall, he got significant votes but
[Guest]: not enough to get power. Assembly was suspended and all that. But people realized that they
[Guest]: were close to it, they were now number two. Therefore, becoming number one is not difficult.
[Guest]: Next election when it came, suddenly the party that was not viable earlier became a dominant
[Guest]: party, Nitish Kumar's party. So, our electoral system does not look kindly to third parties
[Guest]: or fourth parties. Your percentage of the vote doesn't mean anything at all. You win
[Guest]: or lose. That's why the energy barrier is very high. The organizational barrier is much
[Guest]: harder to understand for many people. India did not adequately understand this in my view.
[Guest]: Political scientists didn't pay enough attention. Amit, there is no other country among democracies
[Guest]: in the world where such a huge burden is placed upon political parties, right from the beginning.
[Guest]: However, lower bureaucracy from colonial times till today failed to deliver. He is unaccountable.
[Guest]: An average citizen, 90% of the citizens are weaker and poorer than the lowliest of government
[Guest]: employees, a clerk in a government office. There is tremendous asymmetry of power, but
[Guest]: people never had the capacity to hold the government officials to account or even government
[Guest]: employees to account. So, instead of our founding fathers addressing this challenge by creating
[Guest]: an accountable system and delivery of basic services, they committed a cardinal blunder.
[Guest]: Because they already had the infrastructure of freedom struggle in every village, they
[Guest]: utilized their organization to become intermediaries. They only ensured intermediation so that there
[Guest]: is somebody to hold my hand to deal with the government office or to make the government
[Guest]: office actually function. And that meant an enormous burden on the parties. Even today,
[Guest]: in urban India, you start a political movement. You know what people say, but where is your
[Guest]: man in my street to take care of my needs, for my water supply, to get water on the day
[Guest]: or to get a water connection or power connection or electricity connection or something else.
[Guest]: But where is your man? In no other country is there this burden. Once a party has to
[Guest]: bear this burden, you require about 100 to 200 workers of the party working near full
[Guest]: time in each assembly constituency. And even if you want 15,000 to 20,000 rupees per month
[Guest]: for the person to survive, and that's a policy of 15,000 to 20,000 rupees for the family,
[Guest]: you're looking at 30,000 to 40,000 rupees a month in many states. You're looking at
[Guest]: 3,000 to 4,000 rupees to maintain a party in an assembly constituency every year. After
[Guest]: that is done, corruption, either by the top people to feed these fellows or allowing these
[Guest]: people to plunder at will by a variety of means, including transfers, permits, and particularly
[Guest]: in the early years because of the socialism, state control, therefore much more easy for
[Guest]: this arbitrage, etc., rent-seeking, as you said. That became inevitable. Once parties
[Guest]: are in that trap, whether it's BJP or Congress or CDP or DNK or ADNK, Sushana, you take any
[Guest]: party, they're all in this trap. It's incredibly hard to come out of it. And unless we also
[Guest]: come out of this and make it less necessary for the political parties to build such a
[Guest]: massive apparatus and therefore reduce the entry barrier and make politics do its main
[Guest]: job, the job of politics is fourfold in my view. One is, encourage the best in society
[Guest]: to come into public life, give them a hospitable ground. The second is, allow them to rise
[Guest]: to office through ethical means, not by violating ethics. The third is, provide genuine alternatives
[Guest]: to people in terms of an agenda and policies. The fourth is, actually deliver once you're
[Guest]: elected to office. In India, none of these four purposes is adequately served. Actually,
[Guest]: they're very poorly served. The whole politics is about who is in power. It's like a game.
[Guest]: It's like the old feudal laws. It's nothing to do with any of these four functions. And
[Guest]: that's the reason why most of the truly capable people are generally shunning politics. I
[Guest]: can understand them. They hate politics. And even if they enter politics, it's very difficult
[Guest]: to ethically rise in politics. And you really have no alternatives to offer to the people.
[Guest]: It's just a management of the image and the polarization of people using the primordial
[Guest]: loyalties. And of course, once you're in power, your behavior is fundamentally the same. It's
[Guest]: a minor change of freedom there. It's not an accident. There is a compelling reason.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm guessing this vicious circle of money and power, you know, there seems to be no
[Amit Varma]: way past it, because you need a lot of money to be in politics in the first place. And
[Amit Varma]: money, that money always comes at a cost. And therefore, you need to get to power and
[Amit Varma]: generate more money and so on. And like you said, it's a vicious circle, and there's no
[Amit Varma]: way past it. And a friend of mine once mentioned that even if the best of people enter politics,
[Amit Varma]: they won't remain the best of people anymore, because politics is morally corrosive because
[Amit Varma]: of the compromises that you're forced to make just to survive on a daily basis. Now, all
[Amit Varma]: of this is something that you face through your journey, like the Lok Satta movement
[Amit Varma]: started in 96. But then your party started in 2006. You've had your brushes with electoral
[Amit Varma]: politics, all the while being very aware of what the game is really like. So what did
[Amit Varma]: you feel might mitigate this? And what are your big learnings over the last, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 2030 years in public life?
[Guest]: You know, if we do two things, I mean, and they're relatively easy and politically popular.
[Guest]: The first one is service delivery. If you simply ensure basic services, I'm not talking
[Guest]: about guaranteeing healthcare overnight, I'm talking about getting a certificate, a water
[Guest]: connection, a power connection, getting a land survey, getting a document from government
[Guest]: office, most of which you actually pay a fee. If you ensure that delivery without any intermediation,
[Guest]: some service delivery law is actually enforced and implemented. That's the reason why we
[Guest]: actually have an army of employees and we fund them and we pay them. If you make that
[Guest]: happen, it'll be hugely popular. That is actually the single biggest source of written corruption.
[Guest]: Large-scale corruption, small corruption, largely is because of this. It needs common
[Guest]: property. If you do that, the unintended consequences, not merely the political popularity in reducing
[Guest]: the burden of corruption, as they say, the unintended consequences, the burden on political
[Guest]: parties will slowly disappear. Over time, you won't need such a massive operator to
[Guest]: survive in politics. In no democratic country outside of Indian subcontinent, we have hundreds
[Guest]: of thousands of people doing only politics all the time, all the five years. They are
[Guest]: members of parties, they fund the party to the extent they can, numbers should be certain,
[Guest]: and during election time, they all decide who are the candidates and they all go and
[Guest]: the campaign is again resigned. That's all. Otherwise, the rest of the time, their masters
[Guest]: are their own life. They don't bother about politics, except understanding it intelligently.
[Guest]: Whereas here, it is a full-time, 24-hour day, 365 days a year, five-year occupation. You
[Guest]: simply cannot have modern democracy working in a healthy manner in this country. For service
[Guest]: delivery, I'm deeply disappointed that even the current government of Modi has not even
[Guest]: looked at it. In fact, a law pending before Parliamentary Committee gave a report, a law
[Guest]: pending before Parliament, which was withdrawn. Why was it withdrawn? They just don't want
[Guest]: a service delivery law to enforce discipline in bureaucracy and accountability in bureaucracy
[Guest]: because they're afraid of the collective bargaining power of the bureaucracy, rather
[Guest]: than the people, because they know that they somehow can get the people's vote by other
[Guest]: means. The second is, empower local governments in a responsible way. And the simplest way
[Guest]: to do it is, give a per capita grant to the local government, say, let's say, a thousand
[Guest]: or two thousand rupees per capita per year, which is a small proportion of the total public
[Guest]: expenditure. The government in India spends 30 to 40 thousand rupees per year, per capita.
[Guest]: Give a small percentage of that, and remove yourself from the picture. You don't have
[Guest]: the burden of doing the things that are now being done by local governments. In fact,
[Guest]: there's no budgetary burden. It's just that you're transferring the resource and transferring
[Guest]: the burden of saying, you now take care of it. And have accountability system, a proper
[Guest]: accountability system like an Ombudsman. You will be rid of many of the problems. You can
[Guest]: blame the local government if they fail. You are not responsible for their failure. Narendra
[Guest]: Modi era Chief Minister. And a lot of improvement will happen, initially in urban India, and
[Guest]: eventually in rural India. And it will transform the way of politics. Leadership will rise.
[Guest]: People understand the value of the vote, because local governments are the best tool for democracy.
[Guest]: These are the two easiest things to do now. It's not that we cannot do, or they're not
[Guest]: popular. Our imagination is now so limited. Long years ago, almost 25 years ago, a man
[Guest]: who became a very high-functioning in the country, at the time also fairly high-functioning
[Guest]: in the constitution, he said, Jay Prakash, you're talking about democracy, constitution,
[Guest]: good governance, all these things. But the people in corridors of power, all that matters
[Guest]: is who is in and who is out. So I suppose one way to make them realize is that they
[Guest]: will be out quickly. Therefore, I'm not a great champion of stability of government.
[Guest]: If governments are utterly incapable and utterly corrupt and lacking in imagination, that stability
[Guest]: is stability of the graveyard. Sometimes, if you actually have a quick turnover, if
[Guest]: the politicians are a little scared of elections, and therefore are willing to look at options
[Guest]: out of the box, it is a little more good for the country. And middle classes and media
[Guest]: of India are somehow seduced by the notion that stability at any cost is most important.
[Guest]: Well, I value stability. I don't think stability of the graveyard is what we require.
[Guest]: We require a dynamic society where we look at the political malice and look at fundamental
[Guest]: things.
[Amit Varma]: Jay P, I've taken enough of your time. So I'm going to end with two questions. What
[Amit Varma]: makes you hopeful about the future of Indian politics? And what makes you despair?
[Guest]: Okay, the despair first. There are many things which appear to be nice and well-meaning,
[Guest]: but because they were done very badly, they led to spectacular failures. Let me give two
[Guest]: concrete examples. The local government, 72nd and 74th amendments. On paper, the principle
[Guest]: is sound, well-meaning, much publicity, romanticism. Because then in a horrible way, we created
[Guest]: over-structured, under-powered local governments which are building really an effective local
[Guest]: government with accountability, capable of generating leadership locally and making people
[Guest]: understand the link between the vote and public good, and taxes and services. By wrong design,
[Guest]: by complete lack of professionalism, by lack of passion, by lack of genuine commitment,
[Guest]: by simply grandstanding, we messed up everything. Today, it's much worse than it was in 1993-94.
[Guest]: If we didn't have this wretched amendment, at least some states, some places have experimented
[Guest]: with better local governments, things would have been better. So we're actually making
[Guest]: things worse, in some respect. But speaking the right language, but doing the wrong thing.
[Guest]: The second example is Right to Education Act. Who in their right mind would say India should
[Guest]: not be educated? Every child must not get an opportunity to be educated. But it's
[Guest]: a lousy law. It created exactly the wrong framework, and outcomes are today as bad or
[Guest]: even worse than they were earlier. And as I mentioned to you before, more and more people
[Guest]: are going to private sector, but even there, there's no quality education. So these experiences,
[Guest]: they cause despair. Not because there are no solutions, but because we seem to have
[Guest]: lost the capacity to even imagine. Even when we seem to have some will to do something
[Guest]: right, we don't even know what is right. The intellectual capacity and the professional
[Guest]: capacity to even institutionalize something right and do it well is increasingly in decline
[Guest]: and that's the cause of despair. And as part of that, public discourse is now so shallow.
[Guest]: It's all about tu-tu, me-me, who's winning, who's losing. It's not about the fundamental
[Guest]: issues, let alone the institutional issues. It's not even about education and healthcare.
[Guest]: It's not even about getting justice, you know. A chap in Gurgaon, because there was
[Guest]: a child brutally murdered, this innocent driver, he's beaten up brutally, and the police
[Guest]: accept a confession, and the media and the country doesn't think that there's something
[Guest]: terribly wrong. And it's not one isolated case, it's what's happening in every single
[Guest]: police station everywhere in India. And we seem to have lost the capacity to understand
[Guest]: what's happening and to raise the issue and find an answer. This is despairing.
[Guest]: The optimism comes from two things. One, with increasing incomes, more and more people are
[Guest]: willing to look at what needs to be done. There's not enough of understanding. Some
[Guest]: of us are desperately trying, you are doing, you're trying. All of us are doing our best
[Guest]: to try and see how best we can enhance the capacity to understand and therefore look
[Guest]: at solutions. And it's only getting better because there's similar experience in the
[Guest]: country and across the world. Our economic capacity, while it's not growing as fast
[Guest]: as it should, it's increasing, therefore we can withstand a few shocks a little better
[Guest]: than we used to withstand earlier. And ultimately, I'm a great believer that if a few enlightened
[Guest]: individuals, they understand what is at stake and they do the right thing, even if the bulk
[Guest]: of the people do not understand overnight, eventually people in their own self-interest,
[Guest]: not because they're moral people or they're sane, in their own self-interest they see
[Guest]: the value of it. Yes, if it takes longer, there's a greater price to pay, but in the
[Guest]: medium and long term, I have no doubt that good things will happen. You know what Margaret
[Guest]: Leach said. To change the world, you don't require millions of people on the march. A
[Guest]: few thoughtful, committed people can change the world. Indeed, the sole reason that I
[Guest]: work is. That's what gives me optimism. But I also know that if enough of people who have
[Guest]: the power to change things don't own this and do it swiftly, the price we're paying
[Guest]: as a nation. Already, as I mentioned before and as we all know, of the 49 nations above
[Guest]: $200 billion GDP, India is at the bottom. We deserve more. We deserve better. Every
[Guest]: day we're losing hell of a lot. And grandstanding and sloganeering and pious intentions and
[Guest]: dreams are not good enough. We require institutional mechanisms to translate our dreams into action.
[Guest]: And the longer we delay, the greater the suffering, the greater the misery, and the greater the
[Guest]: missed opportunity in the global competition. Let's hope that we will not delay far too
[Guest]: long and do the best we can.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great note of caution and hope to end the show on. JP, thanks so much for coming
[Amit Varma]: on The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you man. All the best.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, Happy New Year to all of you.
[Unknown]: Happy New Year.